
<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Cron / Cron jobs / Crontab</h1>
</div>

---

# Cron terminology

**Cron**: a time-based job scheduler in Unix-like operating systems. 

**Cron job**: a command or script that is scheduled to run periodically by the cron daemon.

**Crontab** is a file that contains the schedule of cron entries that schedules tasks (commands) to run periodically at fixed times, dates, or intervals.

---

# Cron syntax

```cron
* * * * * command_to_execute
│ │ │ │ │
│ │ │ │ └── Day of the week (0-7, 0 and 7 are Sunday)
│ │ │ └──── Month (1-12)
│ │ └────── Day of the month (1-31)
│ └──────── Hour (0-23)
└────────── Minute (0-59)
```

https://crontab.guru/

---

# How to edit the crontab

The environment variables (`EDITOR`) is optionally. Use it to set the editor you want to use instead of the default one:

```bash
$ EDITOR=nano crontab -e
```

Add the following:

```cron
* * * * * echo "$(date)" >> $HOME/logfile.txt
```

*What does the above do? How often?*

---

# Is it running?

Verify that the cron job is running:

```bash
$ crontab -l
```

Since the smallest unit of time in a cron job is a minute, consider this question while we wait:

*How would we go about running a job every 10 seconds?*

---

# Answer

Let the cron job call a script that contains this:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

for i in {1..6}; do
    echo "$(date)" >> $HOME/logfile.txt
    sleep 10
done
```

You *could* use a while loop and make the script run in the background, but the benefit of a cron job is that it still works after a reboot.

---

# Let's check the log file

```bash
$ cat ~/logfile.txt
```

Great!

---

# Example: Cron job for continuous deployment


```cron
*/5 * * * * cd /path/to/repo && git pull && <command to rerun application>
```

*There's something less optimal about the above approach. Can you spot it?*

---

# Crontab: optimized version

The previous example pulls the repository and restarts the repository every time. Instead, only do it when there is a new commit.

```cron
*/5 * * * * cd /path/to/repo && git fetch && [ "$(git rev-parse HEAD)" != "$(git rev-parse @{u})" ] && git pull && <command to stop the application> && <command to run the application>
```

**Tip**: The cron job is getting complicated. Create a shell script that your cron job can run.

**Note**: These cronjob slides are not an endorsement for picking this solution. They serve to introduce you to the concept.

