<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Searching</h1>
</div>

---

# Searching in SQLite with FTS5

* **Tokenization**: FTS5 breaks down the text into words.

* **Indexing**: FTS5 uses tokenization and word positions to create an index for words. The index contains:

  - **Document ID**: The `rowid` of the document.
  - **Column Index**: Identifies which column the term appears in.
  - **Token Offset**: Specifies the position of the term within the column.
 
* **Performance**: Unlike the LIKE operator which performs a sequential scan of all rows the MATCH operator is faster since it uses an index.

* **Scoring**: At query time, FTS5 calculates a score for each match using [bm25](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okapi_BM25) as the default ranking function, but only if the `rank` column is selected or used in `ORDER BY`.

---

# Searching in PostgreSQL

In PostgreSQL, you must create a `tsvector` column to store the tokenized text:

```postgresql
ALTER TABLE pages ADD COLUMN content_tsv tsvector;
```

Then populate it using English stemming if your page content is in English:

```postgresql
UPDATE pages SET content_tsv = to_tsvector('english', content);
```

Create a generalized inverted index (GIN) on the `tsvector` column. Otherwise it would perform a sequential scan:

```postgresql
CREATE INDEX content_tsv_idx ON pages USING GIN(content_tsv);
```

---

# Searching in PostgreSQL II

Create a trigger to automatically update the `tsvector` column after INSERT or UPDATE:

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION update_content_tsv() RETURNS trigger AS $$
BEGIN
	NEW.content_tsv := to_tsvector('english', NEW.content);
	RETURN NEW;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;

CREATE TRIGGER tsvector_update BEFORE INSERT OR UPDATE
ON pages FOR EACH ROW EXECUTE FUNCTION update_content_tsv();
```

Query example using the `@@` operator to match the `tsvector` column against a search term:

```postgresql
SELECT * FROM pages
WHERE content_tsv @@ plainto_tsquery('english', 'my search terms')
ORDER BY ts_rank(content_tsv, plainto_tsquery('english', 'my search terms')) DESC;
```

---

# Vector Databases

You could also consider using a vector database to achieve semantic search.

You could use PostgreSQL for users and business logic and have a separate vector database for search.


