<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Backup and documentation</h1>
</div>

---

# Take a PostgreSQL dump

Run `pg_dump` inside the container:

```bash
$ docker compose exec -T db pg_dump -U myuser mydatabase > pgdump.sql
```

*What does the file contain?*

<details> 
  <summary>Answer</summary>
   DDL, DML and DCL statements. Basically, everything needed to recreate the database.
</details>

---

# Stop and restart the container

*Does the database persist?*

---

# Get a clean database

The data consists because it is defined in a volume.

Manually get a clean database by:

1. Stop the database. 

2. Delete the image first, then the volume. 

3. Restart the database.

4. [Optional] Verify that the database is empty.

Or use the command to take down the volume:

```bash
$ docker compose down -v
```

---

# Load from the dump into the database

```bash
$ PGPASSWORD=mypassword psql -U myuser -h 127.0.0.1 -d mydatabase < pgdump.sql
```

Check the database.

---

# Load the file when initializing the database

1. Create a folder `initdb` in the same directory as the `docker-compose.yml` file.

2. Move the `pgdump.sql` file to the `initdb` folder and rename it to `init.sql`.

3. Load the file as a volume. In `docker-compose.yml`:

    ```yaml
        volumes:
        - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
        - ./initdb/init.sql:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init.sql # new line
    ```

4. Take down the database and start it again:

    ```bash
    $ docker compose down -v
    $ docker compose up
    ```

---

# Take a MySQL dump

`mysqldump` comes installed with MySQL. If you have MySQL installed locally run:

```bash
$ mysqldump -u <user> -p <database_name> > mysqldump.sql
```

---

# MRO: Generate migrations from an existing schema

MRO: **M**odel **R**elations to **O**bjects

The opposite of an ORM. It generates objects from an existing database.

```bash
$ npx mro
```

Choose the prompt `Knex.js Migrations`.

Run it from where the `.env` file is defined to skip several prompts. 

**Tip**: All prompts can be autoskipped by defining the correct keys in a `.env` file. This is useful for using it in pipelines.

---

# MRO: Generate HTML documentation

```bash
$ npx mro
```

Choose the prompt: `HTML documentation`.

---

# Generating database documentation

*How else can you document your database?*

---

# Documenting databases

**Relational databases**: ER diagrams

**NoSQL databases**: JSON schema, HTML

***Graph databases**: GraphML, Graphviz

And more...

